Helical Tools Guide Started (#15)
helicalco/docs: content/learn/helical-tools/geno.md

---
title: Geno
pcx-content-type: tutorial
weight: 2
meta:
  title: Geno
---

# Geno

## Getting Started

This tutorial will walk you through the process of running geno commands. We will begin with analysing a geno file and understanding the different files that are created. To begin, download the geno file below.

### genotype File

> A file that holds the genotype data for animals. It is arranged in a matrix where each row represents a different animal and each column represents a different marker (SNP). The first column will be an identifier for the animal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A file that holds the genotype data for animals. It is arranged in a matrix where each row represents a different animal and each column represents a different marker (SNP). The first column is the animal identifier.
```

If you want more details you can specifify a directory to store additional files. Lets store them in a temporary folder in the current working directory.

```sh
$ helical geno analyse genotypes -d temp/geno
```

If you head over to your temp folder you should see a folder called geno.

```sh
$ cd temp/geno
```

And listing it - `ls .` - should show you the following files:

```
genotype_report.txt  outliers.txt  snp_report.txt  summary.txt
```

The summary.txt is the exact same thing you've seen above.
If you want some more information on snps, take a look at snp_report.txt.

```sh
$ cat snp_report.txt
```

This will yield the output we want, but it'll be in poor format. This is a good example of how `column` comes in handy.

```sh
$ column -t snp_report.txt
```

Here's the first few lines of the output to be expected:

```
SnpID     MAF   #AA  #AB  #BB  #NC  %AA   %AB   %BB   %NC
SNP00001  0.33  4    5    4    7    0.20  0.25  0.20  0.35
SNP00002  0.53  7    7    4    2    0.35  0.35  0.20  0.10

> SNP00003  0.28  3    5    7    5    0.15  0.25  0.35  0.25

Author: Makes sense

---
title: Geno
pcx-content-type: tutorial
weight: 2
meta:
  title: Geno
---

# Geno

## Getting Started

> 

Reviewer: Add a little blurb up here explaining what the tutorial will do, and that the files should be downloaded to follow along with the tutorial

### genotype File

A file that holds the genotype data for animals. It is arranged in a matrix where each row represents a different animal and each column represents a different marker (SNP). The first column will be an identifier for the animal.

> <a href="../../../downloads/genos" download>Here</a> is the sample geno file we will be using for this tutorial.

Reviewer: Make sure to update these links to be root relative, these kind of assets should be in the static directory

### .map File

Pairs with a .geno file and holds information about the markers. The first column is an identifier for the marker. The second column is the chromosome number. The third column is the position on the chromosome.

<a href="../../../downloads/genos.map" download>Here</a> is the sample map file we will be using for this tutorial.

## Analyse

With the geno file we may want a summary of the data. This can be done with the `analyse` command.

```sh

> $ helical geno analyse path/to/genos/file

Reviewer: Add a note saying you are going to assume the genotypes have been downloaded a file called `genotypes`. Makes it more readable

```

You should get this output:

```
Individuals:                     20
Individuals with no missing loci: 0
Markers:                         1,000
SNPs:                            50
Loci with no missing:            0
Average MAF:                     0.3680
+-----+-------+------+-----------+-------------+----------+------------+
| SNP | COUNT | PROP | GENO MEAN | GENO STDDEV | SNP MEAN | SNP STDDEV |
+-----+-------+------+-----------+-------------+----------+------------+
| AA  | 246   | 0.25 | 12.30     | 3.53        | 4.92     | 1.89       |
| AB  | 244   | 0.24 | 12.20     | 3.64        | 4.88     | 1.59       |
| BB  | 277   | 0.28 | 13.85     | 3.45        | 5.54     | 2.12       |
| NC  | 233   | 0.23 | 11.65     | 3.12        | 4.66     | 1.88       |
+-----+-------+------+-----------+-------------+----------+------------+
```

> - Snps: signifies how many snps are found for each individual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SNPs: signifies how many snps are found for each individual.
```

- Average MAF: the average minor allele frequency.
- Markers: the total amount of snps in the file.

> Then there is a summary of each potential combination of alleles (AA, AB, BB, NC(not counted)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then there is a summary of each potential combination of alleles (AA, AB, BB, NC(No Call)).
```
Remember that this is no call? We talked about it the other day! Try write this stuff down, or even better create pages on the docs site about it :)

For each combination there is a geno mean which signifies the average of that given allele found in a row/individual. There is also a snp mean which is the average of all the snps found in a column/snp.

> If you want more details you can specifify a directory to store additional files. Lets store them in your Documents folder.

Reviewer: Maybe best to just create a temporary folder in the current working directory

```sh
$ helical geno analyse path/to/genos/file -d ~/Documents/geno
```

If you head over to your Documents folder you should see a folder called geno.

```sh
$ cd ~/Documents/geno
```

And listing it - `ls .` - should show you the following files:

```
genotype_report.txt  outliers.txt  snp_report.txt  summary.txt
```

The summary.txt is the exact same thing you've seen above.
If you want some more information on snps, take a look at snp_report.txt.

```sh
$ cat snp_report.txt
```

This will yield the output we want, but it'll be in poor format. This is a good example of how `column` comes in handy.

```sh
$ column -t snp_report.txt
```

Giving you this output:

> ```

Reviewer: Don't include the full output, they can run the command. Just the first few lines is great!

SNP00033  0.28  2    7    8    3    0.10  0.35  0.40  0.15
SNP00034  0.17  2    3    8    7    0.10  0.15  0.40  0.35
SNP00035  0.25  4    2    11   3    0.20  0.10  0.55  0.15
SNP00036  0.38  5    5    6    4    0.25  0.25  0.30  0.20
SNP00037  0.50  9    2    3    6    0.45  0.10  0.15  0.30
SNP00038  0.38  5    5    5    5    0.25  0.25  0.25  0.25
SNP00039  0.35  5    4    8    3    0.25  0.20  0.40  0.15
SNP00040  0.38  4    7    7    2    0.20  0.35  0.35  0.10
SNP00041  0.40  6    4    5    5    0.30  0.20  0.25  0.25
SNP00042  0.40  6    4    6    4    0.30  0.20  0.30  0.20
SNP00043  0.23  3    3    8    6    0.15  0.15  0.40  0.30
SNP00044  0.35  5    4    6    5    0.25  0.20  0.30  0.25
SNP00045  0.25  3    4    6    7    0.15  0.20  0.30  0.35
SNP00046  0.33  3    7    6    4    0.15  0.35  0.30  0.20
SNP00047  0.42  6    5    6    3    0.30  0.25  0.30  0.15
SNP00048  0.47  6    7    5    2    0.30  0.35  0.25  0.10
SNP00049  0.30  4    4    5    7    0.20  0.20  0.25  0.35
SNP00050  0.33  4    5    5    6    0.20  0.25  0.25  0.30
```

This file shows the number of alleles, their proportions and the minor allele frequency for each snp.

> The genotype_report.txt file holds the same information as above, except it's based on each genotype instead, and has a callrate column,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `genotype_report.txt` file holds the same information as above, except it's based on each genotype instead, and has a callrate column,
```

which is a measure of the proportion of individuals that have a valid allele (not an NC).

```

> ID      CallRate  #AA  #AB  #BB  #NC  %AA   %AB   %BB   %NC

Reviewer: Same here, no need for the full output
